\input texinfo @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename qemu-doc.info
@include version.texi

@documentlanguage en
@documentencoding UTF-8

@settitle QEMU version @value{VERSION} User Documentation
@exampleindent 0
@paragraphindent 0
@c %**end of header

@set qemu_system qemu-system-x86_64
@set qemu_system_x86 qemu-system-x86_64

@ifinfo
@direntry
* QEMU: (qemu-doc).    The QEMU Emulator User Documentation.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@iftex
@titlepage
@sp 7
@center @titlefont{QEMU version @value{VERSION}}
@sp 1
@center @titlefont{User Documentation}
@sp 3
@end titlepage
@end iftex

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top

@menu
* Introduction::
* QEMU PC System emulator::
* QEMU System emulator for non PC targets::
* QEMU User space emulator::
* System requirements::
* Security::
* Implementation notes::
* Deprecated features::
* Recently removed features::
* Supported build platforms::
* License::
* Index::
@end menu
@end ifnottex

@contents

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@menu
* intro_features:: Features
@end menu

@node intro_features
@section Features

QEMU is a FAST! processor emulator using dynamic translation to
achieve good emulation speed.

@cindex operating modes
QEMU has two operating modes:

@itemize
@cindex system emulation
@item Full system emulation. In this mode, QEMU emulates a full system (for
example a PC), including one or several processors and various
peripherals. It can be used to launch different Operating Systems
without rebooting the PC or to debug system code.

@cindex user mode emulation
@item User mode emulation. In this mode, QEMU can launch
processes compiled for one CPU on another CPU. It can be used to
launch the Wine Windows API emulator (@url{https://www.winehq.org}) or
to ease cross-compilation and cross-debugging.

@end itemize

QEMU has the following features:

@itemize
@item QEMU can run without a host kernel driver and yet gives acceptable
performance.  It uses dynamic translation to native code for reasonable speed,
with support for self-modifying code and precise exceptions.

@item It is portable to several operating systems (GNU/Linux, *BSD, Mac OS X,
Windows) and architectures.

@item It performs accurate software emulation of the FPU.
@end itemize

QEMU user mode emulation has the following features:
@itemize
@item Generic Linux system call converter, including most ioctls.

@item clone() emulation using native CPU clone() to use Linux scheduler for threads.

@item Accurate signal handling by remapping host signals to target signals.
@end itemize

QEMU full system emulation has the following features:
@itemize
@item
QEMU uses a full software MMU for maximum portability.

@item
QEMU can optionally use an in-kernel accelerator, like kvm. The accelerators
execute most of the guest code natively, while
continuing to emulate the rest of the machine.

@item
Various hardware devices can be emulated and in some cases, host
devices (e.g. serial and parallel ports, USB, drives) can be used
transparently by the guest Operating System. Host device passthrough
can be used for talking to external physical peripherals (e.g. a
webcam, modem or tape drive).

@item
Symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) support.  Currently, an in-kernel
accelerator is required to use more than one host CPU for emulation.

@end itemize


@node QEMU PC System emulator
@chapter QEMU PC System emulator
@cindex system emulation (PC)

@menu
* pcsys_introduction:: Introduction
* pcsys_quickstart::   Quick Start
* sec_invocation::     Invocation
* pcsys_keys::         Keys in the graphical frontends
* mux_keys::           Keys in the character backend multiplexer
* pcsys_monitor::      QEMU Monitor
* cpu_models::         CPU models
* disk_images::        Disk Images
* pcsys_network::      Network emulation
* pcsys_other_devs::   Other Devices
* direct_linux_boot::  Direct Linux Boot
* pcsys_usb::          USB emulation
* vnc_security::       VNC security
* network_tls::        TLS setup for network services
* gdb_usage::          GDB usage
@end menu

@node pcsys_introduction
@section Introduction

@c man begin DESCRIPTION

The QEMU PC System emulator simulates the
following peripherals:

@itemize @minus
@item
i440FX host PCI bridge and PIIX3 PCI to ISA bridge
@item
Cirrus CLGD 5446 PCI VGA card or dummy VGA card with Bochs VESA
extensions (hardware level, including all non standard modes).
@item
PS/2 mouse and keyboard
@item
2 PCI IDE interfaces with hard disk and CD-ROM support
@item
Floppy disk
@item
PCI and ISA network adapters
@item
Serial ports
@item
IPMI BMC, either and internal or external one
@item
Creative SoundBlaster 16 sound card
@item
ENSONIQ AudioPCI ES1370 sound card
@item
Intel 82801AA AC97 Audio compatible sound card
@item
Intel HD Audio Controller and HDA codec
@item
Adlib (OPL2) - Yamaha YM3812 compatible chip
@item
Gravis Ultrasound GF1 sound card
@item
CS4231A compatible sound card
@item
PCI UHCI, OHCI, EHCI or XHCI USB controller and a virtual USB-1.1 hub.
@end itemize

SMP is supported with up to 255 CPUs.

QEMU uses the PC BIOS from the Seabios project and the Plex86/Bochs LGPL
VGA BIOS.

QEMU uses YM3812 emulation by Tatsuyuki Satoh.

QEMU uses GUS emulation (GUSEMU32 @url{http://www.deinmeister.de/gusemu/})
by Tibor "TS" Schütz.

Note that, by default, GUS shares IRQ(7) with parallel ports and so
QEMU must be told to not have parallel ports to have working GUS.

@example
@value{qemu_system_x86} dos.img -soundhw gus -parallel none
@end example

Alternatively:
@example
@value{qemu_system_x86} dos.img -device gus,irq=5
@end example

Or some other unclaimed IRQ.

CS4231A is the chip used in Windows Sound System and GUSMAX products

@c man end

@include docs/system/quickstart.texi
@include docs/system/invocation.texi
@include docs/system/keys.texi
@include docs/system/mux-chardev.texi
@include docs/system/monitor.texi
@include docs/system/cpu-models-x86.texi
@include docs/system/images.texi
@include docs/system/net.texi
@include docs/system/usb.texi
@include docs/system/ivshmem.texi
@include docs/system/linuxboot.texi
@include docs/system/vnc-security.texi
@include docs/system/tls.texi
@include docs/system/gdb.texi

@node QEMU System emulator for non PC targets
@chapter QEMU System emulator for non PC targets

QEMU is a generic emulator and it emulates many non PC
machines. Most of the options are similar to the PC emulator. The
differences are mentioned in the following sections.

@menu
* PowerPC System emulator::
* Sparc32 System emulator::
* Sparc64 System emulator::
* MIPS System emulator::
* ARM System emulator::
* ColdFire System emulator::
* Cris System emulator::
* Microblaze System emulator::
* SH4 System emulator::
* Xtensa System emulator::
@end menu

@node PowerPC System emulator
@section PowerPC System emulator
@cindex system emulation (PowerPC)

Use the executable @file{qemu-system-ppc} to simulate a complete 40P (PREP)
or PowerMac PowerPC system.

QEMU emulates the following PowerMac peripherals:

@itemize @minus
@item
UniNorth or Grackle PCI Bridge
@item
PCI VGA compatible card with VESA Bochs Extensions
@item
2 PMAC IDE interfaces with hard disk and CD-ROM support
@item
NE2000 PCI adapters
@item
Non Volatile RAM
@item
VIA-CUDA with ADB keyboard and mouse.
@end itemize

QEMU emulates the following 40P (PREP) peripherals:

@itemize @minus
@item
PCI Bridge
@item
PCI VGA compatible card with VESA Bochs Extensions
@item
2 IDE interfaces with hard disk and CD-ROM support
@item
Floppy disk
@item
PCnet network adapters
@item
Serial port
@item
PREP Non Volatile RAM
@item
PC compatible keyboard and mouse.
@end itemize

Since version 0.9.1, QEMU uses OpenBIOS @url{https://www.openbios.org/}
for the g3beige and mac99 PowerMac and the 40p machines. OpenBIOS is a free
(GPL v2) portable firmware implementation. The goal is to implement a 100%
IEEE 1275-1994 (referred to as Open Firmware) compliant firmware.

@c man begin OPTIONS

The following options are specific to the PowerPC emulation:

@table @option

@item -g @var{W}x@var{H}[x@var{DEPTH}]

Set the initial VGA graphic mode. The default is 800x600x32.

@item -prom-env @var{string}

Set OpenBIOS variables in NVRAM, for example:

@example
qemu-system-ppc -prom-env 'auto-boot?=false' \
 -prom-env 'boot-device=hd:2,\yaboot' \
 -prom-env 'boot-args=conf=hd:2,\yaboot.conf'
@end example

@end table

@c man end


More information is available at
@url{http://perso.magic.fr/l_indien/qemu-ppc/}.

@node Sparc32 System emulator
@section Sparc32 System emulator
@cindex system emulation (Sparc32)

Use the executable @file{qemu-system-sparc} to simulate the following
Sun4m architecture machines:
@itemize @minus
@item
SPARCstation 4
@item
SPARCstation 5
@item
SPARCstation 10
@item
SPARCstation 20
@item
SPARCserver 600MP
@item
SPARCstation LX
@item
SPARCstation Voyager
@item
SPARCclassic
@item
SPARCbook
@end itemize

The emulation is somewhat complete. SMP up to 16 CPUs is supported,
but Linux limits the number of usable CPUs to 4.

QEMU emulates the following sun4m peripherals:

@itemize @minus
@item
IOMMU
@item
TCX or cgthree Frame buffer
@item
Lance (Am7990) Ethernet
@item
Non Volatile RAM M48T02/M48T08
@item
Slave I/O: timers, interrupt controllers, Zilog serial ports, keyboard
and power/reset logic
@item
ESP SCSI controller with hard disk and CD-ROM support
@item
Floppy drive (not on SS-600MP)
@item
CS4231 sound device (only on SS-5, not working yet)
@end itemize

The number of peripherals is fixed in the architecture.  Maximum
memory size depends on the machine type, for SS-5 it is 256MB and for
others 2047MB.

Since version 0.8.2, QEMU uses OpenBIOS
@url{https://www.openbios.org/}. OpenBIOS is a free (GPL v2) portable
firmware implementation. The goal is to implement a 100% IEEE
1275-1994 (referred to as Open Firmware) compliant firmware.

A sample Linux 2.6 series kernel and ram disk image are available on
the QEMU web site. There are still issues with NetBSD and OpenBSD, but
most kernel versions work. Please note that currently older Solaris kernels
don't work probably due to interface issues between OpenBIOS and
Solaris.

@c man begin OPTIONS

The following options are specific to the Sparc32 emulation:

@table @option

@item -g @var{W}x@var{H}x[x@var{DEPTH}]

Set the initial graphics mode. For TCX, the default is 1024x768x8 with the
option of 1024x768x24. For cgthree, the default is 1024x768x8 with the option
of 1152x900x8 for people who wish to use OBP.

@item -prom-env @var{string}

Set OpenBIOS variables in NVRAM, for example:

@example
qemu-system-sparc -prom-env 'auto-boot?=false' \
 -prom-env 'boot-device=sd(0,2,0):d' -prom-env 'boot-args=linux single'
@end example

@item -M [SS-4|SS-5|SS-10|SS-20|SS-600MP|LX|Voyager|SPARCClassic] [|SPARCbook]

Set the emulated machine type. Default is SS-5.

@end table

@c man end

@node Sparc64 System emulator
@section Sparc64 System emulator
@cindex system emulation (Sparc64)

Use the executable @file{qemu-system-sparc64} to simulate a Sun4u
(UltraSPARC PC-like machine), Sun4v (T1 PC-like machine), or generic
Niagara (T1) machine. The Sun4u emulator is mostly complete, being
able to run Linux, NetBSD and OpenBSD in headless (-nographic) mode. The
Sun4v emulator is still a work in progress.

The Niagara T1 emulator makes use of firmware and OS binaries supplied in the S10image/ directory
of the OpenSPARC T1 project @url{http://download.oracle.com/technetwork/systems/opensparc/OpenSPARCT1_Arch.1.5.tar.bz2}
and is able to boot the disk.s10hw2 Solaris image.
@example
qemu-system-sparc64 -M niagara -L /path-to/S10image/ \
                    -nographic -m 256 \
                    -drive if=pflash,readonly=on,file=/S10image/disk.s10hw2
@end example


QEMU emulates the following peripherals:

@itemize @minus
@item
UltraSparc IIi APB PCI Bridge
@item
PCI VGA compatible card with VESA Bochs Extensions
@item
PS/2 mouse and keyboard
@item
Non Volatile RAM M48T59
@item
PC-compatible serial ports
@item
2 PCI IDE interfaces with hard disk and CD-ROM support
@item
Floppy disk
@end itemize

@c man begin OPTIONS

The following options are specific to the Sparc64 emulation:

@table @option

@item -prom-env @var{string}

Set OpenBIOS variables in NVRAM, for example:

@example
qemu-system-sparc64 -prom-env 'auto-boot?=false'
@end example

@item -M [sun4u|sun4v|niagara]

Set the emulated machine type. The default is sun4u.

@end table

@c man end

@node MIPS System emulator
@section MIPS System emulator
@cindex system emulation (MIPS)

@menu
* recommendations_cpu_models_MIPS:: Supported CPU model configurations on MIPS hosts
* nanoMIPS System emulator ::
@end menu

Four executables cover simulation of 32 and 64-bit MIPS systems in
both endian options, @file{qemu-system-mips}, @file{qemu-system-mipsel}
@file{qemu-system-mips64} and @file{qemu-system-mips64el}.
Five different machine types are emulated:

@itemize @minus
@item
A generic ISA PC-like machine "mips"
@item
The MIPS Malta prototype board "malta"
@item
An ACER Pica "pica61". This machine needs the 64-bit emulator.
@item
MIPS emulator pseudo board "mipssim"
@item
A MIPS Magnum R4000 machine "magnum". This machine needs the 64-bit emulator.
@end itemize

The generic emulation is supported by Debian 'Etch' and is able to
install Debian into a virtual disk image. The following devices are
emulated:

@itemize @minus
@item
A range of MIPS CPUs, default is the 24Kf
@item
PC style serial port
@item
PC style IDE disk
@item
NE2000 network card
@end itemize

The Malta emulation supports the following devices:

@itemize @minus
@item
Core board with MIPS 24Kf CPU and Galileo system controller
@item
PIIX4 PCI/USB/SMbus controller
@item
The Multi-I/O chip's serial device
@item
PCI network cards (PCnet32 and others)
@item
Malta FPGA serial device
@item
Cirrus (default) or any other PCI VGA graphics card
@end itemize

The Boston board emulation supports the following devices:

@itemize @minus
@item
Xilinx FPGA, which includes a PCIe root port and an UART
@item
Intel EG20T PCH connects the I/O peripherals, but only the SATA bus is emulated
@end itemize

The ACER Pica emulation supports:

@itemize @minus
@item
MIPS R4000 CPU
@item
PC-style IRQ and DMA controllers
@item
PC Keyboard
@item
IDE controller
@end itemize

The MIPS Magnum R4000 emulation supports:

@itemize @minus
@item
MIPS R4000 CPU
@item
PC-style IRQ controller
@item
PC Keyboard
@item
SCSI controller
@item
G364 framebuffer
@end itemize

The Fulong 2E emulation supports:

@itemize @minus
@item
Loongson 2E CPU
@item
Bonito64 system controller as North Bridge
@item
VT82C686 chipset as South Bridge
@item
RTL8139D as a network card chipset
@end itemize

The mipssim pseudo board emulation provides an environment similar
to what the proprietary MIPS emulator uses for running Linux.
It supports:

@itemize @minus
@item
A range of MIPS CPUs, default is the 24Kf
@item
PC style serial port
@item
MIPSnet network emulation
@end itemize

@include docs/system/cpu-models-mips.texi

@node nanoMIPS System emulator
@subsection nanoMIPS System emulator
@cindex system emulation (nanoMIPS)

Executable @file{qemu-system-mipsel} also covers simulation of
32-bit nanoMIPS system in little endian mode:

@itemize @minus
@item
nanoMIPS I7200 CPU
@end itemize

Example of @file{qemu-system-mipsel} usage for nanoMIPS is shown below:

Download @code{<disk_image_file>} from @url{https://mipsdistros.mips.com/LinuxDistro/nanomips/buildroot/index.html}.

Download @code{<kernel_image_file>} from @url{https://mipsdistros.mips.com/LinuxDistro/nanomips/kernels/v4.15.18-432-gb2eb9a8b07a1-20180627102142/index.html}.

Start system emulation of Malta board with nanoMIPS I7200 CPU:
@example
qemu-system-mipsel -cpu I7200 -kernel @code{<kernel_image_file>} \
    -M malta -serial stdio -m @code{<memory_size>} -hda @code{<disk_image_file>} \
    -append "mem=256m@@0x0 rw console=ttyS0 vga=cirrus vesa=0x111 root=/dev/sda"
@end example


@node ARM System emulator
@section ARM System emulator
@cindex system emulation (ARM)

Use the executable @file{qemu-system-arm} to simulate a ARM
machine. The ARM Integrator/CP board is emulated with the following
devices:

@itemize @minus
@item
ARM926E, ARM1026E, ARM946E, ARM1136 or Cortex-A8 CPU
@item
Two PL011 UARTs
@item
SMC 91c111 Ethernet adapter
@item
PL110 LCD controller
@item
PL050 KMI with PS/2 keyboard and mouse.
@item
PL181 MultiMedia Card Interface with SD card.
@end itemize

The ARM Versatile baseboard is emulated with the following devices:

@itemize @minus
@item
ARM926E, ARM1136 or Cortex-A8 CPU
@item
PL190 Vectored Interrupt Controller
@item
Four PL011 UARTs
@item
SMC 91c111 Ethernet adapter
@item
PL110 LCD controller
@item
PL050 KMI with PS/2 keyboard and mouse.
@item
PCI host bridge.  Note the emulated PCI bridge only provides access to
PCI memory space.  It does not provide access to PCI IO space.
This means some devices (eg. ne2k_pci NIC) are not usable, and others
(eg. rtl8139 NIC) are only usable when the guest drivers use the memory
mapped control registers.
@item
PCI OHCI USB controller.
@item
LSI53C895A PCI SCSI Host Bus Adapter with hard disk and CD-ROM devices.
@item
PL181 MultiMedia Card Interface with SD card.
@end itemize

Several variants of the ARM RealView baseboard are emulated,
including the EB, PB-A8 and PBX-A9.  Due to interactions with the
bootloader, only certain Linux kernel configurations work out
of the box on these boards.

Kernels for the PB-A8 board should have CONFIG_REALVIEW_HIGH_PHYS_OFFSET
enabled in the kernel, and expect 512M RAM.  Kernels for The PBX-A9 board
should have CONFIG_SPARSEMEM enabled, CONFIG_REALVIEW_HIGH_PHYS_OFFSET
disabled and expect 1024M RAM.

The following devices are emulated:

@itemize @minus
@item
ARM926E, ARM1136, ARM11MPCore, Cortex-A8 or Cortex-A9 MPCore CPU
@item
ARM AMBA Generic/Distributed Interrupt Controller
@item
Four PL011 UARTs
@item
SMC 91c111 or SMSC LAN9118 Ethernet adapter
@item
PL110 LCD controller
@item
PL050 KMI with PS/2 keyboard and mouse
@item
PCI host bridge
@item
PCI OHCI USB controller
@item
LSI53C895A PCI SCSI Host Bus Adapter with hard disk and CD-ROM devices
@item
PL181 MultiMedia Card Interface with SD card.
@end itemize

The XScale-based clamshell PDA models ("Spitz", "Akita", "Borzoi"
and "Terrier") emulation includes the following peripherals:

@itemize @minus
@item
Intel PXA270 System-on-chip (ARM V5TE core)
@item
NAND Flash memory
@item
IBM/Hitachi DSCM microdrive in a PXA PCMCIA slot - not in "Akita"
@item
On-chip OHCI USB controller
@item
On-chip LCD controller
@item
On-chip Real Time Clock
@item
TI ADS7846 touchscreen controller on SSP bus
@item
Maxim MAX1111 analog-digital converter on I@math{^2}C bus
@item
GPIO-connected keyboard controller and LEDs
@item
Secure Digital card connected to PXA MMC/SD host
@item
Three on-chip UARTs
@item
WM8750 audio CODEC on I@math{^2}C and I@math{^2}S busses
@end itemize

The Palm Tungsten|E PDA (codename "Cheetah") emulation includes the
following elements:

@itemize @minus
@item
Texas Instruments OMAP310 System-on-chip (ARM 925T core)
@item
ROM and RAM memories (ROM firmware image can be loaded with -option-rom)
@item
On-chip LCD controller
@item
On-chip Real Time Clock
@item
TI TSC2102i touchscreen controller / analog-digital converter / Audio
CODEC, connected through MicroWire and I@math{^2}S busses
@item
GPIO-connected matrix keypad
@item
Secure Digital card connected to OMAP MMC/SD host
@item
Three on-chip UARTs
@end itemize

Nokia N800 and N810 internet tablets (known also as RX-34 and RX-44 / 48)
emulation supports the following elements:

@itemize @minus
@item
Texas Instruments OMAP2420 System-on-chip (ARM 1136 core)
@item
RAM and non-volatile OneNAND Flash memories
@item
Display connected to EPSON remote framebuffer chip and OMAP on-chip
display controller and a LS041y3 MIPI DBI-C controller
@item
TI TSC2301 (in N800) and TI TSC2005 (in N810) touchscreen controllers
driven through SPI bus
@item
National Semiconductor LM8323-controlled qwerty keyboard driven
through I@math{^2}C bus
@item
Secure Digital card connected to OMAP MMC/SD host
@item
Three OMAP on-chip UARTs and on-chip STI debugging console
@item
Mentor Graphics "Inventra" dual-role USB controller embedded in a TI
TUSB6010 chip - only USB host mode is supported
@item
TI TMP105 temperature sensor driven through I@math{^2}C bus
@item
TI TWL92230C power management companion with an RTC on I@math{^2}C bus
@item
Nokia RETU and TAHVO multi-purpose chips with an RTC, connected
through CBUS
@end itemize

The Luminary Micro Stellaris LM3S811EVB emulation includes the following
devices:

@itemize @minus
@item
Cortex-M3 CPU core.
@item
64k Flash and 8k SRAM.
@item
Timers, UARTs, ADC and I@math{^2}C interface.
@item
OSRAM Pictiva 96x16 OLED with SSD0303 controller on I@math{^2}C bus.
@end itemize

The Luminary Micro Stellaris LM3S6965EVB emulation includes the following
devices:

@itemize @minus
@item
Cortex-M3 CPU core.
@item
256k Flash and 64k SRAM.
@item
Timers, UARTs, ADC, I@math{^2}C and SSI interfaces.
@item
OSRAM Pictiva 128x64 OLED with SSD0323 controller connected via SSI.
@end itemize

The Freecom MusicPal internet radio emulation includes the following
elements:

@itemize @minus
@item
Marvell MV88W8618 ARM core.
@item
32 MB RAM, 256 KB SRAM, 8 MB flash.
@item
Up to 2 16550 UARTs
@item
MV88W8xx8 Ethernet controller
@item
MV88W8618 audio controller, WM8750 CODEC and mixer
@item
128×64 display with brightness control
@item
2 buttons, 2 navigation wheels with button function
@end itemize

The Siemens SX1 models v1 and v2 (default) basic emulation.
The emulation includes the following elements:

@itemize @minus
@item
Texas Instruments OMAP310 System-on-chip (ARM 925T core)
@item
ROM and RAM memories (ROM firmware image can be loaded with -pflash)
V1
1 Flash of 16MB and 1 Flash of 8MB
V2
1 Flash of 32MB
@item
On-chip LCD controller
@item
On-chip Real Time Clock
@item
Secure Digital card connected to OMAP MMC/SD host
@item
Three on-chip UARTs
@end itemize

A Linux 2.6 test image is available on the QEMU web site. More
information is available in the QEMU mailing-list archive.

@c man begin OPTIONS

The following options are specific to the ARM emulation:

@table @option

@item -semihosting
Enable semihosting syscall emulation.

On ARM this implements the "Angel" interface.

Note that this allows guest direct access to the host filesystem,
so should only be used with trusted guest OS.

@end table

@c man end

@node ColdFire System emulator
@section ColdFire System emulator
@cindex system emulation (ColdFire)
@cindex system emulation (M68K)

Use the executable @file{qemu-system-m68k} to simulate a ColdFire machine.
The emulator is able to boot a uClinux kernel.

The M5208EVB emulation includes the following devices:

@itemize @minus
@item
MCF5208 ColdFire V2 Microprocessor (ISA A+ with EMAC).
@item
Three Two on-chip UARTs.
@item
Fast Ethernet Controller (FEC)
@end itemize

The AN5206 emulation includes the following devices:

@itemize @minus
@item
MCF5206 ColdFire V2 Microprocessor.
@item
Two on-chip UARTs.
@end itemize

@c man begin OPTIONS

The following options are specific to the ColdFire emulation:

@table @option

@item -semihosting
Enable semihosting syscall emulation.

On M68K this implements the "ColdFire GDB" interface used by libgloss.

Note that this allows guest direct access to the host filesystem,
so should only be used with trusted guest OS.

@end table

@c man end

@node Cris System emulator
@section Cris System emulator
@cindex system emulation (Cris)

TODO

@node Microblaze System emulator
@section Microblaze System emulator
@cindex system emulation (Microblaze)

TODO

@node SH4 System emulator
@section SH4 System emulator
@cindex system emulation (SH4)

TODO

@node Xtensa System emulator
@section Xtensa System emulator
@cindex system emulation (Xtensa)

Two executables cover simulation of both Xtensa endian options,
@file{qemu-system-xtensa} and @file{qemu-system-xtensaeb}.
Two different machine types are emulated:

@itemize @minus
@item
Xtensa emulator pseudo board "sim"
@item
Avnet LX60/LX110/LX200 board
@end itemize

The sim pseudo board emulation provides an environment similar
to one provided by the proprietary Tensilica ISS.
It supports:

@itemize @minus
@item
A range of Xtensa CPUs, default is the DC232B
@item
Console and filesystem access via semihosting calls
@end itemize

The Avnet LX60/LX110/LX200 emulation supports:

@itemize @minus
@item
A range of Xtensa CPUs, default is the DC232B
@item
16550 UART
@item
OpenCores 10/100 Mbps Ethernet MAC
@end itemize

@c man begin OPTIONS

The following options are specific to the Xtensa emulation:

@table @option

@item -semihosting
Enable semihosting syscall emulation.

Xtensa semihosting provides basic file IO calls, such as open/read/write/seek/select.
Tensilica baremetal libc for ISS and linux platform "sim" use this interface.

Note that this allows guest direct access to the host filesystem,
so should only be used with trusted guest OS.

@end table

@c man end

@node QEMU User space emulator
@chapter QEMU User space emulator

@menu
* Supported Operating Systems ::
* Features::
* Linux User space emulator::
* BSD User space emulator ::
@end menu

@node Supported Operating Systems
@section Supported Operating Systems

The following OS are supported in user space emulation:

@itemize @minus
@item
Linux (referred as qemu-linux-user)
@item
BSD (referred as qemu-bsd-user)
@end itemize

@node Features
@section Features

QEMU user space emulation has the following notable features:

@table @strong
@item System call translation:
QEMU includes a generic system call translator.  This means that
the parameters of the system calls can be converted to fix
endianness and 32/64-bit mismatches between hosts and targets.
IOCTLs can be converted too.

@item POSIX signal handling:
QEMU can redirect to the running program all signals coming from
the host (such as @code{SIGALRM}), as well as synthesize signals from
virtual CPU exceptions (for example @code{SIGFPE} when the program
executes a division by zero).

QEMU relies on the host kernel to emulate most signal system
calls, for example to emulate the signal mask.  On Linux, QEMU
supports both normal and real-time signals.

@item Threading:
On Linux, QEMU can emulate the @code{clone} syscall and create a real
host thread (with a separate virtual CPU) for each emulated thread.
Note that not all targets currently emulate atomic operations correctly.
x86 and ARM use a global lock in order to preserve their semantics.
@end table

QEMU was conceived so that ultimately it can emulate itself. Although
it is not very useful, it is an important test to show the power of the
emulator.

@node Linux User space emulator
@section Linux User space emulator

@menu
* Quick Start::
* Wine launch::
* Command line options::
* Other binaries::
@end menu

@node Quick Start
@subsection Quick Start

In order to launch a Linux process, QEMU needs the process executable
itself and all the target (x86) dynamic libraries used by it.

@itemize

@item On x86, you can just try to launch any process by using the native
libraries:

@example
qemu-i386 -L / /bin/ls
@end example

@code{-L /} tells that the x86 dynamic linker must be searched with a
@file{/} prefix.

@item Since QEMU is also a linux process, you can launch QEMU with
QEMU (NOTE: you can only do that if you compiled QEMU from the sources):

@example
qemu-i386 -L / qemu-i386 -L / /bin/ls
@end example

@item On non x86 CPUs, you need first to download at least an x86 glibc
(@file{qemu-runtime-i386-XXX-.tar.gz} on the QEMU web page). Ensure that
@code{LD_LIBRARY_PATH} is not set:

@example
unset LD_LIBRARY_PATH
@end example

Then you can launch the precompiled @file{ls} x86 executable:

@example
qemu-i386 tests/i386/ls
@end example
You can look at @file{scripts/qemu-binfmt-conf.sh} so that
QEMU is automatically launched by the Linux kernel when you try to
launch x86 executables. It requires the @code{binfmt_misc} module in the
Linux kernel.

@item The x86 version of QEMU is also included. You can try weird things such as:
@example
qemu-i386 /usr/local/qemu-i386/bin/qemu-i386 \
          /usr/local/qemu-i386/bin/ls-i386
@end example

@end itemize

@node Wine launch
@subsection Wine launch

@itemize

@item Ensure that you have a working QEMU with the x86 glibc
distribution (see previous section). In order to verify it, you must be
able to do:

@example
qemu-i386 /usr/local/qemu-i386/bin/ls-i386
@end example

@item Download the binary x86 Wine install
(@file{qemu-XXX-i386-wine.tar.gz} on the QEMU web page).

@item Configure Wine on your account. Look at the provided script
@file{/usr/local/qemu-i386/@/bin/wine-conf.sh}. Your previous
@code{$@{HOME@}/.wine} directory is saved to @code{$@{HOME@}/.wine.org}.

@item Then you can try the example @file{putty.exe}:

@example
qemu-i386 /usr/local/qemu-i386/wine/bin/wine \
          /usr/local/qemu-i386/wine/c/Program\ Files/putty.exe
@end example

@end itemize

@node Command line options
@subsection Command line options

@example
@command{qemu-i386} [@option{-h]} [@option{-d]} [@option{-L} @var{path}] [@option{-s} @var{size}] [@option{-cpu} @var{model}] [@option{-g} @var{port}] [@option{-B} @var{offset}] [@option{-R} @var{size}] @var{program} [@var{arguments}...]
@end example

@table @option
@item -h
Print the help
@item -L path
Set the x86 elf interpreter prefix (default=/usr/local/qemu-i386)
@item -s size
Set the x86 stack size in bytes (default=524288)
@item -cpu model
Select CPU model (-cpu help for list and additional feature selection)
@item -E @var{var}=@var{value}
Set environment @var{var} to @var{value}.
@item -U @var{var}
Remove @var{var} from the environment.
@item -B offset
Offset guest address by the specified number of bytes.  This is useful when
the address region required by guest applications is reserved on the host.
This option is currently only supported on some hosts.
@item -R size
Pre-allocate a guest virtual address space of the given size (in bytes).
"G", "M", and "k" suffixes may be used when specifying the size.
@end table

Debug options:

@table @option
@item -d item1,...
Activate logging of the specified items (use '-d help' for a list of log items)
@item -p pagesize
Act as if the host page size was 'pagesize' bytes
@item -g port
Wait gdb connection to port
@item -singlestep
Run the emulation in single step mode.
@end table

Environment variables:

@table @env
@item QEMU_STRACE
Print system calls and arguments similar to the 'strace' program
(NOTE: the actual 'strace' program will not work because the user
space emulator hasn't implemented ptrace).  At the moment this is
incomplete.  All system calls that don't have a specific argument
format are printed with information for six arguments.  Many
flag-style arguments don't have decoders and will show up as numbers.
@end table

@node Other binaries
@subsection Other binaries

@cindex user mode (Alpha)
@command{qemu-alpha} TODO.

@cindex user mode (ARM)
@command{qemu-armeb} TODO.

@cindex user mode (ARM)
@command{qemu-arm} is also capable of running ARM "Angel" semihosted ELF
binaries (as implemented by the arm-elf and arm-eabi Newlib/GDB
configurations), and arm-uclinux bFLT format binaries.

@cindex user mode (ColdFire)
@cindex user mode (M68K)
@command{qemu-m68k} is capable of running semihosted binaries using the BDM
(m5xxx-ram-hosted.ld) or m68k-sim (sim.ld) syscall interfaces, and
coldfire uClinux bFLT format binaries.

The binary format is detected automatically.

@cindex user mode (Cris)
@command{qemu-cris} TODO.

@cindex user mode (i386)
@command{qemu-i386} TODO.
@command{qemu-x86_64} TODO.

@cindex user mode (Microblaze)
@command{qemu-microblaze} TODO.

@cindex user mode (MIPS)
@command{qemu-mips} executes 32-bit big endian MIPS binaries (MIPS O32 ABI).

@command{qemu-mipsel} executes 32-bit little endian MIPS binaries (MIPS O32 ABI).

@command{qemu-mips64} executes 64-bit big endian MIPS binaries (MIPS N64 ABI).

@command{qemu-mips64el} executes 64-bit little endian MIPS binaries (MIPS N64 ABI).

@command{qemu-mipsn32} executes 32-bit big endian MIPS binaries (MIPS N32 ABI).

@command{qemu-mipsn32el} executes 32-bit little endian MIPS binaries (MIPS N32 ABI).

@cindex user mode (NiosII)
@command{qemu-nios2} TODO.

@cindex user mode (PowerPC)
@command{qemu-ppc64abi32} TODO.
@command{qemu-ppc64} TODO.
@command{qemu-ppc} TODO.

@cindex user mode (SH4)
@command{qemu-sh4eb} TODO.
@command{qemu-sh4} TODO.

@cindex user mode (SPARC)
@command{qemu-sparc} can execute Sparc32 binaries (Sparc32 CPU, 32 bit ABI).

@command{qemu-sparc32plus} can execute Sparc32 and SPARC32PLUS binaries
(Sparc64 CPU, 32 bit ABI).

@command{qemu-sparc64} can execute some Sparc64 (Sparc64 CPU, 64 bit ABI) and
SPARC32PLUS binaries (Sparc64 CPU, 32 bit ABI).

@node BSD User space emulator
@section BSD User space emulator

@menu
* BSD Status::
* BSD Quick Start::
* BSD Command line options::
@end menu

@node BSD Status
@subsection BSD Status

@itemize @minus
@item
target Sparc64 on Sparc64: Some trivial programs work.
@end itemize

@node BSD Quick Start
@subsection Quick Start

In order to launch a BSD process, QEMU needs the process executable
itself and all the target dynamic libraries used by it.

@itemize

@item On Sparc64, you can just try to launch any process by using the native
libraries:

@example
qemu-sparc64 /bin/ls
@end example

@end itemize

@node BSD Command line options
@subsection Command line options

@example
@command{qemu-sparc64} [@option{-h]} [@option{-d]} [@option{-L} @var{path}] [@option{-s} @var{size}] [@option{-bsd} @var{type}] @var{program} [@var{arguments}...]
@end example

@table @option
@item -h
Print the help
@item -L path
Set the library root path (default=/)
@item -s size
Set the stack size in bytes (default=524288)
@item -ignore-environment
Start with an empty environment. Without this option,
the initial environment is a copy of the caller's environment.
@item -E @var{var}=@var{value}
Set environment @var{var} to @var{value}.
@item -U @var{var}
Remove @var{var} from the environment.
@item -bsd type
Set the type of the emulated BSD Operating system. Valid values are
FreeBSD, NetBSD and OpenBSD (default).
@end table

Debug options:

@table @option
@item -d item1,...
Activate logging of the specified items (use '-d help' for a list of log items)
@item -p pagesize
Act as if the host page size was 'pagesize' bytes
@item -singlestep
Run the emulation in single step mode.
@end table

@node System requirements
@chapter System requirements

@section KVM kernel module

On x86_64 hosts, the default set of CPU features enabled by the KVM accelerator
require the host to be running Linux v4.5 or newer.

The OpteronG[345] CPU models require KVM support for RDTSCP, which was
added with Linux 4.5 which is supported by the major distros. And even
if RHEL7 has kernel 3.10, KVM there has the required functionality there
to make it close to a 4.5 or newer kernel.

@include docs/security.texi

@include qemu-tech.texi

@include qemu-deprecated.texi

@node Supported build platforms
@appendix Supported build platforms

QEMU aims to support building and executing on multiple host OS platforms.
This appendix outlines which platforms are the major build targets. These
platforms are used as the basis for deciding upon the minimum required
versions of 3rd party software QEMU depends on. The supported platforms
are the targets for automated testing performed by the project when patches
are submitted for review, and tested before and after merge.

If a platform is not listed here, it does not imply that QEMU won't work.
If an unlisted platform has comparable software versions to a listed platform,
there is every expectation that it will work. Bug reports are welcome for
problems encountered on unlisted platforms unless they are clearly older
vintage than what is described here.

Note that when considering software versions shipped in distros as support
targets, QEMU considers only the version number, and assumes the features in
that distro match the upstream release with the same version. In other words,
if a distro backports extra features to the software in their distro, QEMU
upstream code will not add explicit support for those backports, unless the
feature is auto-detectable in a manner that works for the upstream releases
too.

The Repology site @url{https://repology.org} is a useful resource to identify
currently shipped versions of software in various operating systems, though
it does not cover all distros listed below.

@section Linux OS

For distributions with frequent, short-lifetime releases, the project will
aim to support all versions that are not end of life by their respective
vendors. For the purposes of identifying supported software versions, the
project will look at Fedora, Ubuntu, and openSUSE distros. Other short-
lifetime distros will be assumed to ship similar software versions.

For distributions with long-lifetime releases, the project will aim to support
the most recent major version at all times. Support for the previous major
version will be dropped 2 years after the new major version is released,
or when it reaches ``end of life''. For the purposes of identifying
supported software versions, the project will look at RHEL, Debian,
Ubuntu LTS, and SLES distros. Other long-lifetime distros will be
assumed to ship similar software versions.

@section Windows

The project supports building with current versions of the MinGW toolchain,
hosted on Linux.

@section macOS

The project supports building with the two most recent versions of macOS, with
the current homebrew package set available.

@section FreeBSD

The project aims to support the all the versions which are not end of life.

@section NetBSD

The project aims to support the most recent major version at all times. Support
for the previous major version will be dropped 2 years after the new major
version is released.

@section OpenBSD

The project aims to support the all the versions which are not end of life.

@node License
@appendix License

QEMU is a trademark of Fabrice Bellard.

QEMU is released under the
@url{https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.txt,GNU General Public License},
version 2. Parts of QEMU have specific licenses, see file
@url{https://git.qemu.org/?p=qemu.git;a=blob_plain;f=LICENSE,LICENSE}.

@node Index
@appendix Index
@menu
* Concept Index::
* Function Index::
* Keystroke Index::
* Program Index::
* Data Type Index::
* Variable Index::
@end menu

@node Concept Index
@section Concept Index
This is the main index. Should we combine all keywords in one index? TODO
@printindex cp

@node Function Index
@section Function Index
This index could be used for command line options and monitor functions.
@printindex fn

@node Keystroke Index
@section Keystroke Index

This is a list of all keystrokes which have a special function
in system emulation.

@printindex ky

@node Program Index
@section Program Index
@printindex pg

@node Data Type Index
@section Data Type Index

This index could be used for qdev device names and options.

@printindex tp

@node Variable Index
@section Variable Index
@printindex vr

@bye
