Kendryte K230 virt reference platform (``k230``)
==========================================================================
The ``k230`` machine is compatible with with Kendryte K230 SDK.

The K230 is a chip from the AIoT SoC series made by Kendryte ® — a part of
Canaan Inc. It uses a brand-new multi-heterogeneous unit accelerated computing
structure.

This chip has 2 RISC-V computing cores and a new-generation KPU (Knowledge
Process Unit) smart computing unit.

It has multi-precision AI computing ability, works with many common AI computing
frameworks, and for some typical networks, its usage rate is over 70%. Besides,
the K230 chip supports many peripheral connections and has several special
hardware acceleration units (like 2D and 2.5D accelerators). It can speed up
different tasks (such as image processing, video processing, audio processing
and AI computing). It also has many good features: low delay, high performance,
low power use and fast start-up.

For more information, see <https://www.kendryte.com/en/proDetail/230>

Supported devices
-----------------
The ``k230`` machine supports the following devices:

* 1 c908 cores
* Core Local Interruptor (CLINT)
* Incoming MSI Controller (IMSIC)
* 2 K230 Watchdog Timer
* 4 UART

Boot options
------------
The ``k230`` machine can start using the standard ``-bios``
functionality for loading the boot image. You need to compile and link
the firmware, kernel, and Device Tree (FDT) into a single binary file with
K230 SDK(k230_canmv_defconfig), such as ``uboot``.

Running
-------
Below is an example command line for running the ``k230``
machine:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ qemu-system-riscv64 -machine k230 \
      -bios k230_sdk/output/k230_canmv_defconfig/little/uboot/u-boot \
      -nographic
