                   
 
@setfilename qemu-backup-tool-manpage

@documentlanguage en
@documentencoding UTF-8

\input texinfo
@settitle Manpage_backup_tool 1.0
@copying
This is a manpage for qemu_backup_tool, version 1.0.

Copyright @copyright{} 2016 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@end copying
@ifinfo
@direntry
* QEMU: (qemu-backup-tool-manpage).    Man page for QEMU backup tool.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo
@iftex
@titlepage
@sp 7
@center @titlefont{QEMU_backup_tool}
@sp 1
@center @titlefont{Man Page}
@sp 3
@end titlepage
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Short Sample

@menu
* Name::
* Synopsis::
* list of Commands::
* Command Parameters::
* Command Descriptions::
* License::
@end menu

@end ifnottex

@node Name
@chapter Name

QEMU disk backup tool.

@node Synopsis
@chapter Synopsis


qemu-backup command [ command options].

@node  list of Commands
@chapter  list of Commands
@cindex chapter, first dummy
@itemize
@item qemu-backup guest add [--id id] [--qmp socketpath]
@item qemu-backup guest list
@item qemu-backup drive add [--guest guestname] [--id driveid] [--target target]
@item qemu-backup drive list [--guest guestname]
@item qemu-backup backup [--guest guestname]
@item qemu-backup restore [--guest guestname]
@item qemu-backup drive-remove [--guest guestname] [--id driveid]
@item qemu-backup remove [--guest guestname]
@item qemu-backup drive add [--all] [--guest guestname] [--target target]
@item qemu-backup backup [--inc] [--guest guestname]
@end itemize
@node  Command Parameters
@chapter  Command Parameters
@cindex chapter, first dummy
@itemize
@item --guest: Name of the guest.
@item --id: id of guest or drive.
@item --target: Destination on which you want your backup to be made.
@item --all: Add all the drives present in a guest for backup except cd-rom.
@item --inc: For incremental backup.
@item --qmp: Path of qmp socket.
@end itemize

@node  Command Descriptions
@chapter  Command Descriptions
@cindex chapter, first dummy
@itemize
@item qemu-backup guest add [--id id] [--qmp socketpath]
This command adds a guest to the configuration file given its path to qmp socket.
example:
qemu-backup guest add --id=fedora –qmp=/var/run/qemu/fedora.sock
 
@item qemu-backup guest list
This commands lists the names of guests which are added to configuration file.
 
@item qemu-backup drive add [--guest guestname] [--id driveid] [--target target]
This command adds different drives for backup in a particular guest by giving the name of drive to be backed up and target imagefile in which we want to store the drive backup.
example:
qemu-backup drive add --guest=fedora --id=root
--target=/backup/fedora/root.img
qemu-backup drive add --guest=fedora --id=data
--target=/backup/fedora/data.img
 
@item qemu-backup drive list [--guest guestname]
This commands gives the names of the drive present in a guest which are added for backup.
example: qemu-backup drive list --guest=fedora
 
@item qemu-backup backup [--guest guestname]
 
This command makes the backup of the drives, in their respective given destinations. The ids of drive and their destinations are taken from the configuration file.
example: qemu-backup backup --guest=fedora
 
@item qemu-backup restore [--guest guestname]
This command is needed if we want to restore the backup. It will list the commands to be run for performing the same but will not perform any action.
example: qemu-backup restore --guest=fedora
cp /backup/fedora/root.img /var/run/qemu/fedora/root.img
cp /backup/fedora/data.img /var/run/qemu/fedora/data.img
 
@item qemu-backup drive-remove [--guest guestname] [--id driveid]
This command helps remove a drive which is set for backup in configuration of given host.
example: qemu-backup remove --guest=fedora --id=root
 
@item qemu-backup remove [--guest guestname]
This command removes the guest from the configuration file.
example: qemu-backup remove –guest=fedora
 
@item qemu-backup drive add --all [-guest guestname] [-destination destination]
This command adds all the drives of the guest for backup other than CDROM drive. Here all the backup drives will have the same names as original drives and target will be the destination folder.
example: qemu-backup drive add --all --guest fedora --destination =/backup/fedora/
 
@end itemize


@node License
@appendix License
 
QEMU is a trademark of Fabrice Bellard.
 
QEMU is released under the GNU General Public License (TODO: add link).
Parts of QEMU have specific licenses, see file LICENSE.
 
TODO (refer to file LICENSE, include it, include the GPL?)
 

@bye


 

