\input texinfo
@setfilename qemu-qapi
@documentlanguage en
@exampleindent 0
@paragraphindent 0

@settitle QEMU QAPI Reference Manual

@ifinfo
@direntry
* QEMU: (qemu-doc).    QEMU QAPI Reference Manual
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@iftex
@titlepage
@sp 7
@center @titlefont{{QEMU Emulator {version}}}
@sp 1
@center @titlefont{{QAPI Reference Manual}}
@sp 3
@end titlepage
@end iftex

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top

This is the QMP QAPI reference for QEMU {version}.

@menu
* Introduction::
* API Reference::
* Commands and Events Index::
* Data Types Index::
@end menu

@end ifnottex

@contents

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

The QEMU Machine Protocol (@acronym{{QMP}}) allows applications to
operate a QEMU instance.

QMP is @uref{{http://www.json.org, JSON}} based and features the
following:

@itemize @minus
@item
Lightweight, text-based, easy to parse data format
@item
Asynchronous messages support (ie. events)
@item
Capabilities Negotiation
@end itemize

For detailed information on QEMU Machine Protocol, the specification
is in @file{{qmp-spec.txt}}.

@section Usage

You can use the @option{{-qmp}} option to enable QMP. For example, the
following makes QMP available on localhost port 4444:

@example
$ qemu [...] -qmp tcp:localhost:4444,server,nowait
@end example

However, for more flexibility and to make use of more options, the
@option{{-mon}} command-line option should be used. For instance, the
following example creates one HMP instance (human monitor) on stdio
and one QMP instance on localhost port 4444:

@example
$ qemu [...] -chardev stdio,id=mon0 -mon chardev=mon0,mode=readline \
             -chardev socket,id=mon1,host=localhost,port=4444,server,nowait \
             -mon chardev=mon1,mode=control,pretty=on
@end example

Please, refer to QEMU's manpage for more information.

@section Simple testing

To manually test QMP one can connect with telnet and issue commands by
hand:

@example
$ telnet localhost 4444
Trying 127.0.0.1...
Connected to localhost.
Escape character is '^]'.
@{{
    "QMP": @{{
        "version": @{{
            "qemu": @{{
                "micro": 50,
                "minor": 6,
                "major": 1
            @}},
            "package": ""
        @}},
        "capabilities": [
        ]
    @}}
@}}

@{{ "execute": "qmp_capabilities" @}}
@{{
    "return": @{{
    @}}
@}}

@{{ "execute": "query-status" @}}
@{{
    "return": @{{
        "status": "prelaunch",
        "singlestep": false,
        "running": false
    @}}
@}}
@end example

@section Wiki

Please refer to the @uref{{http://wiki.qemu-project.org/QMP, QMP QEMU
 wiki page}} for more details on QMP.

@node API Reference
@chapter API Reference

@c man begin DESCRIPTION
{qapi}
@c man end

@c man begin SEEALSO
The HTML documentation of QEMU for more precise information.
@c man end

@node Commands and Events Index
@unnumbered Commands and Events Index
@printindex fn
@node Data Types Index
@unnumbered Data Types Index
@printindex tp
@bye
