@example
@c man begin SYNOPSIS
@command{virtiofsd} [OPTION] @option{--socket-path=}@var{path}|@option{--fd=}@var{fdnum} @option{-o source=}@var{path}
@c man end
@end example

@c man begin DESCRIPTION

Share a host directory tree with a guest through a virtio-fs device.  This
program is a vhost-user backend that implements the virtio-fs device.  Each
virtio-fs device instance requires its own virtiofsd process.

This program is designed to work with QEMU's @code{--device vhost-user-fs-pci}
but should work with any virtual machine monitor (VMM) that supports
vhost-user.  See the EXAMPLES section below.

This program must be run as the root user.  Upon startup the program will
switch into a new file system namespace with the shared directory tree as its
root.  This prevents "file system escapes" due to symlinks and other file
system objects that might lead to files outside the shared directory.  The
program also sandboxes itself using seccomp(2) to prevent ptrace(2) and other
vectors that could allow an attacker to compromise the system after gaining
control of the virtiofsd process.

@c man end

@c man begin OPTIONS
@table @option
@item -h, --help
Print help.
@item -V, --version
Print version.
@item -d, -o debug
Enable debug output.
@item --syslog
Print log messages to syslog instead of stderr.
@item -o log_level=@var{level}
Print only log messages matching @var{level} or more severe.  @var{level} is
one of @code{err}, @code{warn}, @code{info}, or @code{debug}.  The default is
@var{info}.
@item -o source=@var{path}
Share host directory tree located at @var{path}.  This option is required.
@item --socket-path=@var{path}, -o vhost_user_socket=@var{path}
Listen on vhost-user UNIX domain socket at @var{path}.
@item --fd=@var{fdnum}
Accept connections from vhost-user UNIX domain socket file descriptor @var{fdnum}.  The file descriptor must already be listening for connections.
@item --thread-pool-size=@var{num}
Restrict the number of worker threads per request queue to @var{num}.  The default is 64.
@item --cache=@code{none}|@code{auto}|@code{always}
Select the desired trade-off between coherency and performance.  @code{none}
forbids the FUSE client from caching to achieve best coherency at the cost of
performance.  @code{auto} acts similar to NFS with a 1 second metadata cache
timeout.  @code{always} sets a long cache lifetime at the expense of coherency.
@item --writeback
Enable writeback cache, allowing the FUSE client to buffer and merge write requests.
@end table
@c man end

@c man begin EXAMPLES
Export @code{/var/lib/fs/vm001/} on vhost-user UNIX domain socket @code{/var/run/vm001-vhost-fs.sock}:

@example
host# virtiofsd --socket-path=/var/run/vm001-vhost-fs.sock -o source=/var/lib/fs/vm001
host# qemu-system-x86_64 \
    -chardev socket,id=char0,path=/var/run/vm001-vhost-fs.sock \
    -device vhost-user-fs-pci,chardev=char0,tag=myfs \
    -object memory-backend-file,id=mem,size=4G,mem-path=/dev/shm,share=on \
    -numa node,memdev=mem \
    ...
guest# mount -t virtio_fs \
    -o default_permissions,allow_other,user_id=0,group_id=0,rootmode=040000,dax \
    myfs /mnt
@end example
@c man end

@ignore
@setfilename virtiofsd
@settitle QEMU virtio-fs shared file system daemon

@c man begin AUTHOR
Copyright (C) 2019 Red Hat, Inc.
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
@c man end
@end ignore
